README.md, before:

# CLI Motivation
This repository is meant as a simple example to illustrate advantages of command line usage over graphical interfaces in some cases.
It is meant for complete CLI novices who need motivation to learn the *new* interface.
The example is designed for a course with biologists but should be easily adjustable to other audiences.

# Idea
Give your audience a repetitive task that they can easily solve using the GUI as long as the sample size is small.
For example sorting files into subfolders based on their name and gathering information from text files.
This should take them no longer than five minutes.
After they finish give them the exact same task but with a huge sample size where their GUI method would take hours.
This sets the stage for the basic command line utilities.
They can then be teached using existing material (e.g. [Konrad's Introduction](https://github.com/konrad/Introduction_to_the_Unix_Shell_for_biologists) or the [Software Carpentry Lesson](http://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/)).
In the end everyone should be able to solve the task easily using what they learned.

# The Example
Imagine your lab has a machine that measures your samples and creates three output files per run:
 - A `.csv` file with the raw data
 - A `.txt` file with log information
 - A `.png` file with a graph

The files are stored with the following pattern:
`<runid>_<operator>.<suffix>`
where `runid` is a random id generated by the machine, the `operator` is the name of the person who did the experiment and the `suffix` is one of `.csv`, `.txt`, and `.png`.

Your lab has three members (Alice, Bob, and Charly) who regularly do measurements with the machine and all files are stored in the `data` directory.
You pick up the files with a USB device and now you want to give everyone their files.

Moreover, the last line of the `.txt` file is always either `FAIL` or `SUCCESS` depending on whether the measurement was successful.
For the next lab meeting you want to know how many of the measurements of each person were successful.

## Task 1
Split the files in the `data` folder into sub-directories for each person.

## Task 2
Give the number of `SUCCESS` and `FAIL` per person.

# The Generator Script
In order to create suitable data structures there is a script called `create_folder_structure.sh`.
This script is not polished but usable.
It creates a defined folder and in there the specified number of files for the given list of names.
Example:

```
# Create a data folder with 5 files for Alice, Bob, and Charly, each
create_folder_structure.sh -o data -n 5 Alice Bob Charly

# Create a bigdata folder with 100 files for Alice, Bob, and Charly, each
create_folder_structure.sh -o bigdata -n 100 Alice Bob Charly
```

Attention: For large `-n` the actual number of files might be less due to collissions in either `$RANDOM` or the 4-digit hash.

# Possible Solutions
There are obviously many ways to solve the challenge with the command line.
An exemplary solution using the Alice, Bob, Charly example from above is:
```
# Task 1
cd bigdata
mkdir Alice Bob Charly
mv *Alice.* Alice
mv *Bob.* Bob
mv *Charly.* Charly

# Task 2
tail -n1 -q Alice/*.txt | sort | uniq -c
tail -n1 -q Bob/*.txt | sort | uniq -c
tail -n1 -q Charly/*.txt | sort | uniq -c
```

So concepts that need to be tought in the lesson are:
 - file commands (`cd`, `mkdir`, `mv`)
 - globs (`*`)
 - basic commands (`tail`, `sort`, `uniq`)
 - help (`man`, `-h`, `--help` to learn about `-q` and `-c` options)

# License
The [bavaria_ipsum.txt](bavaria_ipsum.txt) file is available under [CC-BY-SA](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/deed.de) from [Michael Bundscherer (aurum:media)](http://bavaria-ipsum.de/impressum.html).
Other content of this repository is available under [CC-BY](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), source code under [MIT](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

Commit message:

Added new Task : Task 3 Wordcount

README.md, after:

# CLI Motivation
This repository is meant as a simple example to illustrate advantages of command line usage over graphical interfaces in some cases.
It is meant for complete CLI novices who need motivation to learn the *new* interface.
The example is designed for a course with biologists but should be easily adjustable to other audiences.

# Idea
Give your audience a repetitive task that they can easily solve using the GUI as long as the sample size is small.
For example sorting files into subfolders based on their name and gathering information from text files.
This should take them no longer than five minutes.
After they finish give them the exact same task but with a huge sample size where their GUI method would take hours.
This sets the stage for the basic command line utilities.
They can then be teached using existing material (e.g. [Konrad's Introduction](https://github.com/konrad/Introduction_to_the_Unix_Shell_for_biologists) or the [Software Carpentry Lesson](http://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/)).
In the end everyone should be able to solve the task easily using what they learned.

# The Example
Imagine your lab has a machine that measures your samples and creates three output files per run:
 - A `.csv` file with the raw data
 - A `.txt` file with log information
 - A `.png` file with a graph

The files are stored with the following pattern:
`<runid>_<operator>.<suffix>`
where `runid` is a random id generated by the machine, the `operator` is the name of the person who did the experiment and the `suffix` is one of `.csv`, `.txt`, and `.png`.

Your lab has three members (Alice, Bob, and Charly) who regularly do measurements with the machine and all files are stored in the `data` directory.
You pick up the files with a USB device and now you want to give everyone their files.

Moreover, the last line of the `.txt` file is always either `FAIL` or `SUCCESS` depending on whether the measurement was successful.
For the next lab meeting you want to know how many of the measurements of each person were successful.

## Task 1
Split the files in the `data` folder into sub-directories for each person.

## Task 2
Give the number of `SUCCESS` and `FAIL` per person.

## Task 3
Open a large .txt file in Word, LibreOffice or similiar and write the number of words and lines in a new file. Compare results with ` wc -l foo.txt > wordcount.txt `

# The Generator Script
In order to create suitable data structures there is a script called `create_folder_structure.sh`.
This script is not polished but usable.
It creates a defined folder and in there the specified number of files for the given list of names.
Example:

```
# Create a data folder with 5 files for Alice, Bob, and Charly, each
create_folder_structure.sh -o data -n 5 Alice Bob Charly

# Create a bigdata folder with 100 files for Alice, Bob, and Charly, each
create_folder_structure.sh -o bigdata -n 100 Alice Bob Charly
```

Attention: For large `-n` the actual number of files might be less due to collissions in either `$RANDOM` or the 4-digit hash.

# Possible Solutions
There are obviously many ways to solve the challenge with the command line.
An exemplary solution using the Alice, Bob, Charly example from above is:
```
# Task 1
cd bigdata
mkdir Alice Bob Charly
mv *Alice.* Alice
mv *Bob.* Bob
mv *Charly.* Charly

# Task 2
tail -n1 -q Alice/*.txt | sort | uniq -c
tail -n1 -q Bob/*.txt | sort | uniq -c
tail -n1 -q Charly/*.txt | sort | uniq -c
```

So concepts that need to be tought in the lesson are:
 - file commands (`cd`, `mkdir`, `mv`)
 - globs (`*`)
 - basic commands (`tail`, `sort`, `uniq`)
 - help (`man`, `-h`, `--help` to learn about `-q` and `-c` options)

# License
The [bavaria_ipsum.txt](bavaria_ipsum.txt) file is available under [CC-BY-SA](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/deed.de) from [Michael Bundscherer (aurum:media)](http://bavaria-ipsum.de/impressum.html).
Other content of this repository is available under [CC-BY](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), source code under [MIT](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).
